RV128
==========

_work in progress_

Notes on candidate instructions for RV128 (unofficial).

A ‘candidate’ RISC-V 128-bit ISA is proposed for an ABI that
can choose to use either 64-bit or 128-bit pointers. A 64-bit
pointer model (offsets from a base register) will provide the
benefits of the larger 128-bit integrals while controlling the
size of application binaries.

A 64-bit near model is introduced and referred to as `LP64FP128`
(Long and Pointer 64-bit, Far Pointer 128-bit).

Present day code is already using 128-bit, 256-bit, and 512-bit
registers for scientific code (DNA string search), multimedia,
device security and many other applications. 2048-bit big integers
are in every day use in public key cryptography and 256-bit Eliptic
Curve encryption along with the GF(2^128) Galois Field algorithms
are in widespread use. The popular examples are ECDHE and AES128-GCM
AEAD algorithms employed by Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Edge, Internet
Exporer, Apple Safari and Google Chrome. There are numerous
applications that can benefit from the increased bandwidth offered
by 128-bit integrals.

However while large integrals are available today, the maximum physical
addressable bits on typical processors remains in the order of 32-48
bits (virtual) and 32-44 bits (physical). Future processors at the
very high end may soon reach 57-bits although it is likely that for
the next two decades, a compact code model that uses 64-bit pointers,
in the common case is likely to be more practical on 128-bit CPUs,
while at the same time not precluding a pure 128-bit pointer model.

With this in mind an `LP64FP128` model is proposed alongside a `P128`
model that uses the full 128-bit address space for pointers.

Instead of redefining existing C type sizes as was done during the
transtion from `ILP32` to `LP64` and `LLP64`, these two proposals
retain the current meaning of `long`, `long long` and introduce a
new C type: `long long long` that requires no new language keywords.

C / C++ types                 | ILP32 | LP64  | P128  | LP64FP128
-------------                 | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----:
int                           | 32    | 32    | 32    | 32
long                          | 32    | 64    | 64    | 64
long long                     | 64    | 64    | 64    | 64
__int128 (GCC)                | -     | -     | 128   | 128
long long long                | -     | -     | 128   | 128
void*                         | 32    | 64    | 128   | 64
void* __attribute__ ((near))  | 32    | 64    | 128   | 64
void* __attribute__ ((far))   | 32    | 64    | 128   | 128

Notes
-----------

- riscv32 is `ILP32`
- riscv64 is `LP64` (code model is 32-bits, data model is 64-bits)
- riscv128 is `LP64FP128` (code model is 32-bits, data model is 128-bits with 64-bit base register offsets)
- `int128_t` and `uint128_t` types for `<cstdint>` and `<stdint.h>`
- With P128:      `sizeof(uintptr_t) == sizeof(uintmax_t) (*2)`
- With LP64FP128: `sizeof(uintptr_t) != sizeof(uintmax_t) (*2)`

RV128I
================

The majority of the RV128 instruction set is a simple translation from
the RV32 and RV64 bit model however the RV128I load and store instructions
needs special consideration due to the OP-LOAD encoding space and other
issues such as the RISC-V atomics model not being strictly compatible with
the C11 atomics model. Also, the current OP-LOAD major opcode has one free
instruction based on the I-Type encoding (12-bit offset), so an alternative
encoding is considered.

Instruction      | Opcode
:-----------     | :---------
ADDD             | OP-64
SUBD             | OP-64
SLLD             | OP-64
SRLD             | OP-64
SUBD             | OP-64
SRAD             | OP-64
ADDID            | OP-IMM-64
SLLID            | OP-IMM-64
SRLID            | OP-IMM-64
SRAID            | OP-IMM-64

RV128M
================

Instruction      | Opcode
:-----------     | :---------
MULD             | OP-64
DIVD             | OP-64
DIVUD            | OP-64
REMD             | OP-64
REMUD            | OP-64

RV128A
================

Instruction      | Opcode      | Encoding
:-----------     | :---------  | :-------------
LR.D             | OP-AMO      | funct3[14:12]=Q.width
SC.D             | OP-AMO      | funct3[14:12]=Q.width
AMO{*}.D         | OP-AMO      | funct3[14:12]=Q.width

RV32Q, RV64Q
================

Instruction      | Opcode      | Encoding
:-----------     | :---------  | :-------------
FLQ              | OP-LOAD-FP  | funct3[14:12]=Q.width
FSQ              | OP-STORE-FP | funct3[14:12]=Q.width
F{*}.Q           | OP-FP       | fmt[26:25]=Q.fmt

RV128FDQ
================

Opcode           | Opcode      | Encoding
:-----------     | :---------  | :-------------
FCVT.{F,D,Q}.C   | OP-FP       | funct5[31:27]={{F,D,Q}.C}, fmt[26:25]={S,D,Q}
FCVT.{F,D,Q}.CU  | OP-FP       | funct5[31:27]={{F,D,Q}.CU}, fmt[26:25]={S,D,Q}
FCVT.C.{F,D,Q}   | OP-FP       | funct5[31:27]={C.{F,D,Q}}, fmt[26:25]={S,D,Q}
FCVT.CU.{F,D,Q}  | OP-FP       | funct5[31:27]={CU.{F,D,Q}}, fmt[26:25]={S,D,Q}

OP-LOAD-STORE-128
========================

Given the proposed 128-bit ABI will make large use of register register loads
and stores, a register register encoding is proposed that is similar to the
AMO encoding and contains slots for 3 registers and 7 function bits instead
of 2 registers and 12 immediate bits.

One of the main concerns raised about a potential register register encoding
for loads and stores is the requirement for 3 register read ports for stores.
This is also required for Fused Multiply Add, and it may be that the additional
read port can be justified on larger RV128 designs.

Opcode             | Operands       | Notes
:----------        | :------------- | :---------
LW                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LWU	               | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LD                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LDU	               | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LQ                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LQU	               | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LX                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1) | can set metadata address bit
SW                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1)
SD                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1)
SQ                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1)
SX                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1) | can set metadata address bit
AMOCMPSWAP.{w,d,q} | flags rd,rs2,(rs1)

Byte and Half instructions may or may not be supported due to the AMO width encoding.

- Consider far strings (byte and half register relative instructions).

Opcode             | Operands       | Notes
:----------        | :------------- | :---------
LB                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LBU                | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LH                 | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
LHU                | flags rd,rs2(rs1)
SB                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1)
SH                 | flags rs3,rs2(rs1)

Notes
==========

- Layout equivalent to AMO; funct5 encoding space and 2-bit width is encoding available for the opcode
- Represent C11 atomics using memory flags from fence `pred,succ` to allow consume, not `.aq.rl`
- Load prefetch temporal hint to preload data into cache, rd = x0
- Load and Store read around and write around temporal hints (cache bybass)
- LX and SX are duplicately defined in addition to the XLEN length loads and stores.
  LX and SX are XLEN loads and stores of addresses versus integrals (LW,LD,LQ)
  while functionally equivalent differ in that they do not specify word length
  being loaded and instead load the native width of the operating mode. This
  distinction also allows static analysis to distinguish pointer word sized loads. 
- Potentiall use two major opcodes to un-alias register slots in 31:27 and 11:7 and increase encoding space
- Decide between using `OP-LOAD-STORE-128` or `OP-LOAD-128` and `OP-STORE-128`
- Increased encoding space would allow code and data pointer metadata bit for LX and SX
- There is precedent for aliasing register slots. The RVC compressed encodings alias rd/rs1

Address Groups
===================

- Flags could optionally be able to indicate metadata. e.g. the "address group bit"
  that is similar in concept to extended internal state in the FPU register file,
  or they could be implicitly set by LX and SX.
- Separate instruction for forming address allows an implementation to treat
  addresses as a separate group and invalidate metadata address bit based on
  operations that are not valid on the address group e.g. `address + offset` is
  valid while `address + address` is invalid. Implementations can load
  offsets into the lower bits of generel purpose registers and use offsets
  with register register loads and stores against a base register such as `gp`,
  `tp` or `sp`.
- X-Only code can used immediates for form addresses using large offsets. In
  an extension that has an address group bit, immediate instructions in X-only
  code could be formed that once added with an address in an existing register
  e.g. 'gp' could form a new address.
